# BOLT Proposals

The Lightning Specification consists of a number of BOLT documents that
describe both the technical requirements as well as some of the rationale
behind the choices that were made while coming up with those requirements. It
was decided early on that, unlike the RFC or the Bitcoin BIP processes, the
BOLTs should serve as living documents, never be finalized, and edited
in-place as new proposals were proposed, with the git commits and tags serving
as versioning mechanism. The living document has a number of advantages over a
collection of finalized documents that incrementally build on each other. In
particular the aim is to create a single source of truth for future
developers, and allowing them to follow the document without having to piece
together the individual parts and how proposals are combined.

One downside of the living document approach however is that the documents
grow organically, changes for a single proposal may be spread across multiple
BOLTs and the reasoning behind the decisions may be difficult to reconstruct
after the fact.

This directory is a collection of self-contained proposals that are being
drafted, discussed or applied to the BOLTs. The proposals are complementary to
the BOLTs. The aim is to provide a place for each proposal to document the
full design of any changes in a central place before applying the change to
the BOLTs. This facilitates discussion since each proposal has an
authoritative version that is being discussed, and allows the BOLTs to
reference the proposal from which they were extracted to give a more complete
picture of the rationale that caused them.

## Current Proposals

| Number | BOLTs affected | Description |
|--------|----------------|-------------|

[ml]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/
